### phylogenetics 101 - trees


Phylogenetic trees can be represented in multiple formats, but nonetheless they all share several interesting implications. 


If N = n. species, there are:


* N terminal branches
* 2N-3 total branches
* N-3 internal branches
* N-2 internal nodes


Regarding the number of trees which can possibly describe the relationships between a given number of terminal nodes (_e.g._ species),
I will just say that is a number which goes up quite quickly. This even more true for trees with a root, as 
for each unrooted there are 2N-3 times as many rooted trees. Here are some numbers: 


| Leaves        | Unrooted trees           | Rooted trees  |
| ------------- |:------------------------:| -------------:|
| 3             | 1                        | 3             |
| 5             | 15                       | 105           |
| 7             | 945                      | 10,395        |
| 9             | 135,135                  | 2,027,025     |
| 10            | 2,027,025                | 34,459,425    |


---


### The Newick format:

The Newick format was developed in the 1980s and is often associated with the Newick Conference held at the [Newick restaurant](http://newicks.com/) in Dover, New Hampshire. 
Its simplicity made it quickly popular in the phylogenetics community, making it a _de facto_ standard for exchanging tree data. The Newick is a combinations of parentheses, 
punctuation, numbers & letters. Lets take a look at some possibilities the ```.nwk``` offers:


```
(,(),(,)));                         	  no nodes are named

(A,(B,(C,D)));                     	      leaf nodes are named

(A,(B,(C,D)E))F;                     	  all nodes are named

(:0.1,(:0.2,(:0.3,:0.4):0.5));    	      all but root node have a distance to parent

(:0.1,(:0.2,(:0.3,:0.4):0.5)):0.0;     	  all have a distance to parent

(A:0.1,(B:0.2,(C:0.3,D:0.4):0.5));    	  distances and leaf names (popular)

(A:0.1,(B:0.2,(C:0.3,D:0.4)E:0.5))F; 	  distances and all names

((B:0.2,(C:0.3,D:0.4)E:0.5)A:0.1))F; 	  a tree rooted on a leaf node (rare)
```


Also consider that Newick trees - as all phylogenetics trees - can be not-fully-dichotomous:


- this tree contains a polytomy: ```(A,B,(C,D));```

- this tree contains only dichotomies: ```(A,(B,(C,D)));```


Last but not least, remember that ```.nwk``` trees are not unique representations, 
and that relationships between terminals can be written in several different ways.
For example, the following three strings all describe the exact same tree topology:


```
(A,B,(C,D));
(B,A,(C,D));
((C,D),A,B);
(A,B,(D,C));
```


Common pitfalls:


- Always end your Newick string with a semicolon ```;```.
- Unbalanced parentheses are one of the most frequent sources of problems - opening and closing parentheses must match.
- Either include branch lengths for all nodes or omit them entirely.
- Special characters (spaces, colons, commas, parentheses) inside taxon names must be quoted, for example: ```'Homo sapiens'```.
- Whitespace (spaces, tabs, newlines) is generally ignored and you may encounter trees formatted across multiple lines.


---


### The Nexus format:


Originally developed in the early 1990s by researchers including Wayne Maddison and David Maddison, Nexus was created to address the need for a flexible format capable of 
holding various types of biological data. It can store complex datasets and the instructions needed for different analytical software. This makes it especially useful for studies 
that integrate multiple data types, such as molecular sequences and morphological traits. Lets take a look at its structure and syntax.


Every Nexus file begins with a header line that indicates that the file follows the Nexus conventions:


```
#NEXUS
```


Nexus files are organized into one or more "blocks." Each block is a section that groups related data or commands. A block starts with the keyword ```BEGIN``` followed by the block name, and ends with ```END;```. The TAXA Block contains definitions of taxa (e.g., species or sequences).


```
  DIMENSIONS NTAX=4;
  TAXLABELS A B C D;
END;
```
CHARACTERS (or DATA) Block stores character matrices or sequence data. This block can include details about the number of characters, formatting, and missing data symbols.


```
BEGIN CHARACTERS;
  DIMENSIONS NCHAR=100;
  FORMAT DATATYPE=DNA MISSING=? GAP=-;
  MATRIX
    A ATGCT...,
    B ATG-T...
  ;
END;
```


TREES Block contains one or more phylogenetic trees - in Newick format! Trees can be annotated with branch lengths, support values, or other metadata.


```
BEGIN TREES;
  TREE tree1 = ((A,B),(C,D));
END;
```


---


We can visualize ```.nwk``` and ```.nexus``` files either [online](https://itol.embl.de/upload.cgi) or using software as [FigTree](http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). 
Take a look at some examples [here](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP26/tree/main/data/example_trees) and discuss them.


---


#### [main](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP26)